README.rst, before:

README
======

|PyPI| |github tag| |github tests|

Python API for interacting with dtool lookup server.

This package offers a class-based asynchronous lookup API within ``dtool_lookup_api.core.LookupClient``, 
a simple class-less wrapper around it at ``dtool_lookup_api.asynchronous``,
and a synchronous interface on top at ``dtool_lookup_api.synchronous``.

Direct imports of utility functions from `dtool_lookup_api` in the examples below forward to the synchronous API variant.


Installation
------------

To install the dtool_lookup_api package.

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install dtool_lookup_api

This package depends on a `dtool-lookup-server
<https://github.com/jic-dtool/dtool-lookup-server>`_ instance to talk to.

Configuration
-------------

The API needs to know the URL of the lookup server

.. code-block:: bash

    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_URL=http://localhost:5000

You may also need specify an access token generated on the server

.. code-block:: bash

    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_TOKEN=$(flask user token testuser)


Instead of specifying the access token directly, it is also possible to provide

.. code-block:: bash

    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_TOKEN_GENERATOR_URL=http://localhost:5001
    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_USERNAME=my-username
    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_PASSWORD=my-password

for the API to request a token. This, however, is intended only for testing
purposes and strongly discouraged in a production environment, as your password
would reside within environment variables or the dtool config file as clear text.

Our recommended setup is a combination of

.. code-block:: bash

    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_URL=http://localhost:5000
    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_TOKEN_GENERATOR_URL=http://localhost:5001

in the config. If used interactively, the API will then ask for your
credentials at the first interaction and cache the provided values for this
session, i.e.

.. code-block::

    In [1]: from dtool_lookup_api import query
       ...: res = query(
       ...:     {
       ...:         'readme.owners.name': {'$regex': '^Testing User$'},
       ...:     }
       ...: )
    Authentication URL http://localhost:5001/token username:my-username
    Authentication URL http://localhost:5001/token password:

    In [2]: res
    Out[2]:
    [{'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
      'created_at': 'Sun, 08 Nov 2020 18:38:40 GMT',
      'creator_username': 'jotelha',
      'dtoolcore_version': '3.17.0',
      'frozen_at': 'Wed, 11 Nov 2020 17:20:30 GMT',
      'name': 'simple_test_dataset',
      'tags': [],
      'type': 'dataset',
      'uri': 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675',
      'uuid': '1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'}]

    In [3]: from dtool_lookup_api import all
       ...: all()
    Out[4]:
    [{'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
      'created_at': 1604860720.736269,
      'creator_username': 'jotelha',
      'frozen_at': 1604921621.719575,
      'name': 'simple_test_dataset',
      'uri': 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675',
      'uuid': '1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'}]

Credentials caching and interactive prompting are turned off with

.. code-block::

  In [1]: import dtool_lookup_api.core.config
     ...: dtool_lookup_api.core.config.Config.interactive = False
     ...: dtool_lookup_api.core.config.Config.cache = False

  In [2]: from dtool_lookup_api import all
     ...: all()
  ...
  RuntimeError: Authentication failed

For testing purposes, it is possible to disable SSL certificates validation with

.. code-block:: bash

    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_VERIFY_SSL=false

As usual, these settings may be specified within the default dtool configuration
file as well, i.e. at ``~/.config/dtool/dtool.json``

.. code-block:: bash

    {
        "DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_TOKEN_GENERATOR_URL": "http://localhost:5001/token",
        "DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_URL": "https://localhost:5000"
    }


List all datasets
-----------------

To list all registered datasets

.. code-block::

    In [1]: from dtool_lookup_api import all
       ...: res = all()

    In [2]: res
    Out[2]:
    [{'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
    'created_at': 1604860720.736269,
    'creator_username': 'jotelha',
    'frozen_at': 1604921621.719575,
    'name': 'simple_test_dataset',
    'uri': 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675',
    'uuid': '1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'}]



Looking up datasets by UUID
---------------------------

To lookup URIs from a dataset UUID within Python

.. code-block::

    In [1]: from dtool_lookup_api import lookup
       ...: uuid = "1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675"
       ...: res = lookup(uuid)

    In [2]: res
    Out[2]:
    [{'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
      'created_at': 1604860720.736269,
      'creator_username': 'jotelha',
      'frozen_at': 1604921621.719575,
      'name': 'simple_test_dataset',
      'uri': 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675',
      'uuid': '1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'}]


Full text searching
-------------------

Full text search for the word "test"

.. code-block::

    In [1]: from dtool_lookup_api import search
        ...: res = search("test")

    In [2]: res
    Out[2]:
    [{'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
      'created_at': 1604860720.736,
      'creator_username': 'jotelha',
      'dtoolcore_version': '3.17.0',
      'frozen_at': 1605027357.308,
      'name': 'simple_test_dataset',
      'tags': [],
      'type': 'dataset',
      'uri': 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675',
      'uuid': '1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'}]


Manifest
--------

Request the manifest of a particular dataset by URI

.. code-block::

    In [1]: from dtool_lookup_api import manifest
       ...: uri = 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'
       ...: res = manifest(uri)

    In [2]: res
    Out[2]:
    {'dtoolcore_version': '3.17.0',
     'hash_function': 'md5sum_hexdigest',
     'items': {'eb58eb70ebcddf630feeea28834f5256c207edfd': {'hash': '2f7d9c3e0cfd47e8fcab0c12447b2bf0',
       'relpath': 'simple_text_file.txt',
       'size_in_bytes': 17,
       'utc_timestamp': 1605027357.284966}}}


Readme
------

Request the readme cotent of a particular dataset by URI

.. code-block::

    In [1]: from dtool_lookup_api import readme
        ..: res = readme('smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675')

    In [2]: res
    Out[2]:
    {'creation_date': '2020-11-08',
    'description': 'testing description',
    'expiration_date': '2022-11-08',
    'funders': [{'code': 'testing_code',
     'organization': 'testing_organization',
     'program': 'testing_program'}],
    'owners': [{'email': 'testing@test.edu',
     'name': 'Testing User',
     'orcid': 'testing_orcid',
     'username': 'testing_user'}],
    'project': 'testing project'}



Direct mongo language queries
-----------------------------

To list all datasets at a certain base URI with their name matching some regular
expression pattern, send a direct mongo language query to the server with

.. code-block::

    In [15]: from dtool_lookup_api import query
        ...: res = query(
        ...:     {
        ...:         'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
        ...:         'name': {'$regex': 'test'},
        ...:     }
        ...: )

    In [16]: res
    Out[16]:
    [{'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
    'created_at': 'Sun, 08 Nov 2020 18:38:40 GMT',
    'creator_username': 'jotelha',
    'dtoolcore_version': '3.17.0',
    'frozen_at': 'Tue, 10 Nov 2020 16:55:57 GMT',
    'name': 'simple_test_dataset',
    'tags': [],
    'type': 'dataset',
    'uri': 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675',
    'uuid': '1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'}]


It is possible to search readme content via

.. code-block::

    In [21]: from dtool_lookup_api import query
        ...: res = query(
        ...:     {
        ...:         'readme.owners.name': {'$regex': '^Testing User$'},
        ...:     }
        ...: )

    In [22]: res
    Out[22]:
    [{'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
      'created_at': 'Sun, 08 Nov 2020 18:38:40 GMT',
      'creator_username': 'jotelha',
      'dtoolcore_version': '3.17.0',
      'frozen_at': 'Tue, 10 Nov 2020 16:55:57 GMT',
      'name': 'simple_test_dataset',
      'tags': [],
      'type': 'dataset',
      'uri': 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675',
      'uuid': '1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'}]

This requires the server-side `dtool-lookup-server-direct-mongo-plugin
<https://github.com/IMTEK-Simulation/dtool-lookup-server-direct-mongo-plugin>`_.

TODO: Response from server-side direct mongo plugin still yields dates as strings.
Fix within https://github.com/IMTEK-Simulation/dtool-lookup-server-direct-mongo-plugin.


Usage on Jupyter notebook
--------------------------

The current implementation via ``asgiref.async_to_sync`` (https://github.com/django/asgiref) 
hinders the use of the synchronous interface within Jupyter notebooks. 
Directly use the asynchronous api instead

.. code-block:: python

    import dtool_lookup_api.asynchronous as dl
    res = await dl.query({
        'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
        'name': {'$regex': 'test'},
    })

.. |PyPI| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/dtool-lookup-api 
    :alt: PyPI
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/dtool-lookup-api/

.. |github tag| image:: https://img.shields.io/github/v/tag/IMTEK-Simulation/dtool-lookup-api 
    :alt: GitHub tag (latest by date)
    :target: https://github.com/IMTEK-Simulation/dtool-lookup-api/tags

.. |github tests| image:: https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/IMTEK-Simulation/dtool-lookup-api/test?label=tests 
    :alt: GitHub Workflow Status
    :target: https://github.com/IMTEK-Simulation/dtool-lookup-api/actions?query=workflow%3Atest

Commit message:

Snippet for queries that works both in jupyter and py

README.rst, after:

README
======

|PyPI| |github tag| |github tests|

Python API for interacting with dtool lookup server.

This package offers a class-based asynchronous lookup API within ``dtool_lookup_api.core.LookupClient``, 
a simple class-less wrapper around it at ``dtool_lookup_api.asynchronous``,
and a synchronous interface on top at ``dtool_lookup_api.synchronous``.

Direct imports of utility functions from `dtool_lookup_api` in the examples below forward to the synchronous API variant.


Installation
------------

To install the dtool_lookup_api package.

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install dtool_lookup_api

This package depends on a `dtool-lookup-server
<https://github.com/jic-dtool/dtool-lookup-server>`_ instance to talk to.

Configuration
-------------

The API needs to know the URL of the lookup server

.. code-block:: bash

    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_URL=http://localhost:5000

You may also need specify an access token generated on the server

.. code-block:: bash

    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_TOKEN=$(flask user token testuser)


Instead of specifying the access token directly, it is also possible to provide

.. code-block:: bash

    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_TOKEN_GENERATOR_URL=http://localhost:5001
    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_USERNAME=my-username
    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_PASSWORD=my-password

for the API to request a token. This, however, is intended only for testing
purposes and strongly discouraged in a production environment, as your password
would reside within environment variables or the dtool config file as clear text.

Our recommended setup is a combination of

.. code-block:: bash

    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_URL=http://localhost:5000
    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_TOKEN_GENERATOR_URL=http://localhost:5001

in the config. If used interactively, the API will then ask for your
credentials at the first interaction and cache the provided values for this
session, i.e.

.. code-block::

    In [1]: from dtool_lookup_api import query
       ...: res = query(
       ...:     {
       ...:         'readme.owners.name': {'$regex': '^Testing User$'},
       ...:     }
       ...: )
    Authentication URL http://localhost:5001/token username:my-username
    Authentication URL http://localhost:5001/token password:

    In [2]: res
    Out[2]:
    [{'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
      'created_at': 'Sun, 08 Nov 2020 18:38:40 GMT',
      'creator_username': 'jotelha',
      'dtoolcore_version': '3.17.0',
      'frozen_at': 'Wed, 11 Nov 2020 17:20:30 GMT',
      'name': 'simple_test_dataset',
      'tags': [],
      'type': 'dataset',
      'uri': 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675',
      'uuid': '1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'}]

    In [3]: from dtool_lookup_api import all
       ...: all()
    Out[4]:
    [{'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
      'created_at': 1604860720.736269,
      'creator_username': 'jotelha',
      'frozen_at': 1604921621.719575,
      'name': 'simple_test_dataset',
      'uri': 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675',
      'uuid': '1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'}]

Credentials caching and interactive prompting are turned off with

.. code-block::

  In [1]: import dtool_lookup_api.core.config
     ...: dtool_lookup_api.core.config.Config.interactive = False
     ...: dtool_lookup_api.core.config.Config.cache = False

  In [2]: from dtool_lookup_api import all
     ...: all()
  ...
  RuntimeError: Authentication failed

For testing purposes, it is possible to disable SSL certificates validation with

.. code-block:: bash

    export DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_VERIFY_SSL=false

As usual, these settings may be specified within the default dtool configuration
file as well, i.e. at ``~/.config/dtool/dtool.json``

.. code-block:: bash

    {
        "DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_TOKEN_GENERATOR_URL": "http://localhost:5001/token",
        "DTOOL_LOOKUP_SERVER_URL": "https://localhost:5000"
    }


List all datasets
-----------------

To list all registered datasets

.. code-block::

    In [1]: from dtool_lookup_api import all
       ...: res = all()

    In [2]: res
    Out[2]:
    [{'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
    'created_at': 1604860720.736269,
    'creator_username': 'jotelha',
    'frozen_at': 1604921621.719575,
    'name': 'simple_test_dataset',
    'uri': 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675',
    'uuid': '1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'}]



Looking up datasets by UUID
---------------------------

To lookup URIs from a dataset UUID within Python

.. code-block::

    In [1]: from dtool_lookup_api import lookup
       ...: uuid = "1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675"
       ...: res = lookup(uuid)

    In [2]: res
    Out[2]:
    [{'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
      'created_at': 1604860720.736269,
      'creator_username': 'jotelha',
      'frozen_at': 1604921621.719575,
      'name': 'simple_test_dataset',
      'uri': 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675',
      'uuid': '1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'}]


Full text searching
-------------------

Full text search for the word "test"

.. code-block::

    In [1]: from dtool_lookup_api import search
        ...: res = search("test")

    In [2]: res
    Out[2]:
    [{'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
      'created_at': 1604860720.736,
      'creator_username': 'jotelha',
      'dtoolcore_version': '3.17.0',
      'frozen_at': 1605027357.308,
      'name': 'simple_test_dataset',
      'tags': [],
      'type': 'dataset',
      'uri': 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675',
      'uuid': '1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'}]


Manifest
--------

Request the manifest of a particular dataset by URI

.. code-block::

    In [1]: from dtool_lookup_api import manifest
       ...: uri = 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'
       ...: res = manifest(uri)

    In [2]: res
    Out[2]:
    {'dtoolcore_version': '3.17.0',
     'hash_function': 'md5sum_hexdigest',
     'items': {'eb58eb70ebcddf630feeea28834f5256c207edfd': {'hash': '2f7d9c3e0cfd47e8fcab0c12447b2bf0',
       'relpath': 'simple_text_file.txt',
       'size_in_bytes': 17,
       'utc_timestamp': 1605027357.284966}}}


Readme
------

Request the readme cotent of a particular dataset by URI

.. code-block::

    In [1]: from dtool_lookup_api import readme
        ..: res = readme('smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675')

    In [2]: res
    Out[2]:
    {'creation_date': '2020-11-08',
    'description': 'testing description',
    'expiration_date': '2022-11-08',
    'funders': [{'code': 'testing_code',
     'organization': 'testing_organization',
     'program': 'testing_program'}],
    'owners': [{'email': 'testing@test.edu',
     'name': 'Testing User',
     'orcid': 'testing_orcid',
     'username': 'testing_user'}],
    'project': 'testing project'}



Direct mongo language queries
-----------------------------

To list all datasets at a certain base URI with their name matching some regular
expression pattern, send a direct mongo language query to the server with

.. code-block::

    In [15]: from dtool_lookup_api import query
        ...: res = query(
        ...:     {
        ...:         'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
        ...:         'name': {'$regex': 'test'},
        ...:     }
        ...: )

    In [16]: res
    Out[16]:
    [{'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
    'created_at': 'Sun, 08 Nov 2020 18:38:40 GMT',
    'creator_username': 'jotelha',
    'dtoolcore_version': '3.17.0',
    'frozen_at': 'Tue, 10 Nov 2020 16:55:57 GMT',
    'name': 'simple_test_dataset',
    'tags': [],
    'type': 'dataset',
    'uri': 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675',
    'uuid': '1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'}]


It is possible to search readme content via

.. code-block::

    In [21]: from dtool_lookup_api import query
        ...: res = query(
        ...:     {
        ...:         'readme.owners.name': {'$regex': '^Testing User$'},
        ...:     }
        ...: )

    In [22]: res
    Out[22]:
    [{'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
      'created_at': 'Sun, 08 Nov 2020 18:38:40 GMT',
      'creator_username': 'jotelha',
      'dtoolcore_version': '3.17.0',
      'frozen_at': 'Tue, 10 Nov 2020 16:55:57 GMT',
      'name': 'simple_test_dataset',
      'tags': [],
      'type': 'dataset',
      'uri': 'smb://test-share/1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675',
      'uuid': '1a1f9fad-8589-413e-9602-5bbd66bfe675'}]

This requires the server-side `dtool-lookup-server-direct-mongo-plugin
<https://github.com/IMTEK-Simulation/dtool-lookup-server-direct-mongo-plugin>`_.

TODO: Response from server-side direct mongo plugin still yields dates as strings.
Fix within https://github.com/IMTEK-Simulation/dtool-lookup-server-direct-mongo-plugin.


Usage on Jupyter notebook
--------------------------

The current implementation via ``asgiref.async_to_sync`` (https://github.com/django/asgiref) 
hinders the use of the synchronous interface within Jupyter notebooks. 
Directly use the asynchronous api instead

.. code-block:: python

    import dtool_lookup_api.asynchronous as dl
    res = await dl.query({
        'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
        'name': {'$regex': 'test'},
    })

The drawback of the above approach is that the same code doesn't work in python and in jupyter (`await` outsite of a function is a syntax error in non-interactive python context).
The code below can be executed in both contexts:

.. code-block:: python

    import dtool_lookup_api.asynchronous as dl
    if asyncio.get_event_loop().is_running():
        # then we are in jupyter notebook
        # this allows nested event loops, i.e. calls to asyncio.run inside the notebook as well
        # This way, the same code works in notebook and python
        import nest_asyncio
        nest_asyncio.apply()

    def query(query_dict):
        return asyncio.run(dl.query(query_dict))
    
    query({
        'base_uri': 'smb://test-share',
        'name': {'$regex': 'test'},
    })

See https://github.com/jupyter/notebook/issues/3397#issuecomment-419386811, https://ipython.readthedocs.io/en/stable/interactive/autoawait.html

.. |PyPI| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/dtool-lookup-api 
    :alt: PyPI
    :target: https://pypi.org/project/dtool-lookup-api/

.. |github tag| image:: https://img.shields.io/github/v/tag/IMTEK-Simulation/dtool-lookup-api 
    :alt: GitHub tag (latest by date)
    :target: https://github.com/IMTEK-Simulation/dtool-lookup-api/tags

.. |github tests| image:: https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/IMTEK-Simulation/dtool-lookup-api/test?label=tests 
    :alt: GitHub Workflow Status
    :target: https://github.com/IMTEK-Simulation/dtool-lookup-api/actions?query=workflow%3Atest
